You are the single most requested guest.
>> And let me tell you, this has not been
easy because we went to some hard
places. But I don't think we'll ever
talk about anything more important than
this. Cuz it's not fear that gets in the
way of us being brave with our lives and
our [music] work. It's the armor that we
reach for to self-protect when we're
afraid. And how [music] that armor moves
us away from love, connection, and our
values. [music] And the hardest work is
being aware of what is my armor when I'm
afraid. Is that automatic?
>> Oh, no. It's a training.
>> So, let's start with that then.
>> Bnee Brown is an icon whose worldleading
research in shame, vulnerability, and
connection
>> has inspired [music] companies like
Pixar, Google, and the US special forces
>> to build stronger leaders and help the
everyday person unlock their full
potential.
>> Ready?
>> Is vulnerability important?
>> It is if we want to be brave with our
lives. But we were raised to believe
that vulnerability is weakness. [music]
Like in my family, we were allowed
anger, but sad was not an option. You
needed to be tough. And so when I get
scared, when I [music] feel anxious,
disappointed, I'm just angry. And so
when you're raised without
vulnerability, it'll put you in
jeopardy. Like, you want to know what
vulnerability is? Joy. Joy is so
vulnerable [music] that people choose to
live disappointed rather than to get
excited about something and risk getting
sucker punched by disappointment. Like,
there is no courage without
vulnerability because courage is the
willingness to show up and be allin when
you cannot predict the outcome.
>> Wow. I've never thought about that
before. But you can develop skills.
>> Megan's four steps to courage.
>> Yes. We've taken 165,000 people through
this work. That included how to build
trust.
>> And I've heard about your marble jar
theory. Could you explain to me what
your marble jar look how excited you
are?
>> I know.
>> So this is how we teach trust to the
most senior leaders in [music] Fortune
100 companies. It's awesome.
>> I see messages all the time in the
comment section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because a strange way
you are you're part of our history and
you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you [music]
[singing]
Renee.
In order to um understand all the work
that you have done and the perspective
that you have on the world and also who
you are as a anomaly in many respects, I
think it's probably important that I
understand your earliest context, where
you've come from, what shaped you.
>> I'm stuck on an am I a am I an anomaly?
>> I of course you're an anomaly. Of course
you're an anomaly. That that should be
of no surprise to you. I mean, if you
look at your outcomes, your outcomes are
anomalous. So, one would assume that
there's some form [snorts] of something
that made you an anomaly.
I would say that
I'm a fifth generation Texan.
I
came from a fair amount of dysfunction.
Parents doing the best they could
with what they knew.
both coming from really really really
tough upbringings that included you know
poverty
addiction and so probably a lot of the
stereotypes you would think about fifth
generation Texan tough don't cry we were
allowed a very small continuum of
emotions were approval you know or
approved which were pissed off or okay
like anger was okay but no you couldn't
be sad really or vulnerability was not a
thing. Vulnerability was weakness and
scary and puts you in jeopardy. I felt
like a real outsider at home and in
school, but I was really good at reading
people, reading situations. I think my I
think a therapist somewhere along the
way said, "Yes, that's hypervigilance.
>> You're hypervigilant.
>> You know, I can see everything around
me. I know everything's going on. I can
connect things very quickly that other
people don't see." And there was
laughter and there was love.
But there was a ton of unpredictability.
>> I was going to say, isn't that typically
what creates hypervigilance is some kind
of need to be that aware when you're
young?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think yes, being
funloving
was very valued in my family and being
tough. These were the values. These are
these are on the parental scorecard.
>> This is what got you an A. if you're
fun, easy, you can, you know, shoot
straight, spit far, fish well, like
really drive fast. And so those things
were very valued. Athleticism was very
valued.
Um,
but those fun things could turn really
hard very quickly.
There was a big pause there. 4 second
pause as you
>> Yeah. I could just picture it like it's
fun until
It's fun until you've had a parent eject
e ejected from a game for being so hard.
>> And that was your father.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh, he was really hard then if he was
ejected from a game.
>> Oh yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> There's a photo I saw of you and your
siblings where you're clutching your
siblings and I think you referred to it
as you could see there was a certain
fear in your eyes. Do you know the photo
I'm referring to? Am I on a couch?
>> You're on a couch.
>> Like a yellow velour couch like from the
70s.
>> Yes. Yeah.
>> I think about that picture. I like that
picture. But there was definitely I
definitely had a protector role as the
oldest. I mean code named sister
superior. It was jokingly but it wasn't
joking. Like if things got hard between
my parents and they would get in
volatile fights, I would go get all my
siblings, put them in my room. I'd go
downstairs and handle it, you know? Like
I was definitely the protector.
physically volatile fights
>> um on occasion but more emotionally
volatile.
>> Screaming and shouting. Yeah.
>> Same with my parents.
>> Yeah. Just loud.
>> There's a background in my whole house
for my whole childhood was just
screaming.
>> There was Yeah. We had a lot of
screaming and there's a certain like if
you grew up with screaming, hearing
screaming through a wall,
>> you [clears throat] know that sound.
>> Mhm.
>> Do you hear that sound?
>> Of course. Yeah. Oh my god. It was my
whole childhood. Yeah.
>> Was that seven days of screaming?
>> Yeah. And so, yeah, I'm sorry because I
don't like to hear that about your
childhood and I don't like to know that
about my childhood, but there was a lot
of screaming. And so, I think
hypervigilant,
protective,
responsible
with a dose of
be very [__] careful
because
I will protect my siblings.
And and how did that change your model
of love as a young person? It must have
been because I mean I obviously feel the
same way about about my situation. And
um I think the lesson I learned was that
love was like a prison cuz it was my mom
doing the shouting and my dad was the
prisoner and he wouldn't respond. So
this you've got a woman shouting at him
for six seven hours a day and him sat
there like he's a like an inanimate
object looking at the screen. And I
remember thinking, "Oh, okay. So, if I
get in a relationship when I'm older,
then I'm going to be a prisoner to a
woman. Okay? Doesn't sound doesn't sound
appealing. And if you move to a
different room, you'd follow him. So,
I avoided relationships like the [__]
plague.
I did well until about 27.
[clears throat]
>> And then what?
>> And then someone got over the wall and
corrected some of the evidence.
>> They got over the wall.
>> She got over the wall somehow.
>> Yeah. Steve got over the wall. Damn it.
That's your partner, not me. Just for
context.
>> No, NOT YEAH. NOT YOU. [laughter]
ALTHOUGH YOU'RE DOING A HELL of a job
right now. Um, you're like, you've
crossed a piranha filled moat that I
like. Um, but the drawbridge is like I'm
see I'm just see I'm going to see my
Steve. My Steve definitely
definitely got over the wall.
Um, but it was like game game recognizes
game. He had a wall.
>> Oh, okay.
>> Yeah. Uh, and so we had long
conversations about our walls and and
slowly through those conversations. We
just
those walls crumbled with each other and
we've been together now for 38 years.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah. Um, the hardest thing I've ever
done in my life
bar none, dude. Nothing has been harder.
>> When I started dating, Steve,
>> well, when we got married, six months
after we got married, this is, you know,
you you said for you love was going to
be being a prisoner. Mhm.
>> And having to just shut down to survive.
>> Mhm.
>> Right.
>> Run away.
>> Run away. Right.
>> Don't confront it. No conversations now.
>> No. No.
>> Um for me, 6 months after we were
married, I went to go see a therapist.
And I said, "I cannot do this. I've got
to get out of this marriage." And we had
dated off and on for 7 years before we
got married. And I said, "I got to get
out." And she said, "I could th this is
hard. I I could see how this is not
working." And I was like, I had a twinge
of defensiveness about Steve. And I
said, 'What do you mean? And she said,
he likes you so much more than you like
you. It must be terrible.
It's like, [__] you, man. You're fired.
[laughter]
I was like, I am so
I thought, what? That's what I do. So if
you I'm going to give you one of my
tells. If I do a really highpitched what
that means I'm that means I'm looking
for my purse and I'm g get I know where
the door is. Um I I I just kept thinking
what what do you mean? He said it's got
it's got to be very com uncomfortable to
be with someone who sees you and really
knows you and loves you so much when you
have not found a way to see you and love
you so much. It's got to be
disconcerting.
What an [__] man. like, wow. And it
was true. I had to get to this point
where I was like, I maybe I should like
me as much as he likes me and then make
a better decision about whether this is
going to work or not.
When you grow up
and pissed off or shut down are your two
emotional opportunities. Like there, you
know, in Atlas of the Heart, I write
about 87 emotions that I think are
important to understand because the
limits of our language are the limits of
our world.
When you have two buckets,
then everything must go in those. And in
fact, in our research over the last 15
years, we found the average person can
accurately identify and name three
emotions. Happy, sad, pissed off.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> And so in my family, sad was not an
option. That was weakness. So you could
be pissed or okay. So when I get scared,
when I feel grief, when I'm anxious,
when I feel disappointment, when I feel
anguish,
I'm just angry.
There's two sort of outstanding question
marks in my head and they might be the
same answer, but it's you said earlier
on that you didn't fit in at school or
at home, and I didn't understand why you
didn't fit in at school or at home. And
then the other thing that's still a
question mark in my head is the
therapist said to you that you well
asserted that you didn't like yourself
as much as he liked you. And I wasn't
clear on what made you not like
yourself.
>> I wanted out of where I was raised. I
wanted to leave everything I knew. And
so I always felt like an outsider. I
didn't
didn't want to do I mean I wasn't
popular. I wasn't dating a quarterback.
That was a dream that my my parents and
their parents and their parents, you
know, you were you were a bearcadet and
you dated a quarterback and you got a
farm. So at I felt not cute, not
popular, not understood.
And then at home,
I wasn't easygoing.
I was an I was anxious.
and and always ready.
>> And the point about self-esteem, which
the therapist sort of highlighted about
not liking oneself as much as Steve
liked you, where did that come from or
is that related in some way?
>> Oh, cuz my parents parented with a very
big heaping dose of shame.
>> Oh, okay. So, if you accomplish
something or you don't accomplish
something, you're made to feel bad about
it.
>> Yeah.
And a ton of it was about appearance,
being fun.
>> Appearance.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Like, you know, big blonde
hair with hot rollers. The higher the
hair, the closer to God. You needed to
be tough and strong and throw on a
baseball cap and get somewhere really
quick, lowmaintenance,
and you needed to be a beauty pageant
queen.
Do you remember them ever being critical
of your appearance in a way that has
stayed with you?
>> Oh, I guess.
I mean, I think not just them. I mean,
like I think
having young girls and young women,
keeping them
from developing threats to their
self-esteem
is not just a parental thing. It's like
it's like asking them not to breathe
because the air is poison. Like it's
like every message from everywhere, you
know, the fashion magazines, you'd read
them and you think, "Wow,
I don't I don't look like this. How am I
going to look like this?" You know, and
you'd lather yourself up with baby oil
and you put lemon juice in your hair.
You put tin foil under your chin, get as
much sun cancer as you could cuz we
didn't know, you know, like you you'd we
all wore jeans that you had to put on
with pliers with for the zipper cuz they
were so tight. appearance mattered. This
is Texas, baby.
>> You go off to university eventually, and
not a straight line, but eventually you
get into university.
>> Not a straight line.
>> That's the sweetest thing you've said to
me. Um, I graduated from college when I
was 29.
>> Wow.
>> So, you become a research professor in
2001 [clears throat]
and you've been a research professor and
many more things um, ever since then.
You get your PhD in social work at the
University of Houston, Texas between 96
and 2002. And really for the last couple
of decades, you've focused on research,
understanding people. Obviously, there's
so many more strings to your bow in
terms of like media and podcasting and
authorship, but over those since 2001,
we're in 2025 now, just over two
decades. My first question is um how has
your perspective on how has the world
changed in those last two decades in
your view?
Unions would say before any
great progression
there is a regression
and I think that
when you look at various admin I know
you have a very global audience when you
look at administrations
political administrations across the
world and you look at
how power is being used right now
it will tell you a lot about what
they're afraid of.
>> What What is that face? We're gonna have
to pause it.
>> I was thinking about a conversation I
had recently with my my best friends. It
must have been this weekend. Yeah, it
was this weekend cuz it was my friend's
birthday in Manchester, the UK. So, we
flew in. Um and we had a conversation
about how the leading political
narrative at the moment, this might be
adjacent to what you were saying, but
it's the way I interpreted it. The
leading political narrative at the
moment that seems to be getting people
elected is if you say those people with
that skin color are the reason for the
pain and anguish in your life. It's
actually the people below you that are
coming over the border or crossing the
the English Channel on dingies that are
ruining your life. And it seems to be
like a really effective narrative to
earn power both in the US and the UK.
like the central narrative that is
swaying elections it seems at the moment
in the UK and the US is those brown
people on that boat or coming over the
border are the reason for the pain in
your life and it seems to work and that
seems to be the thing getting power so
that's kind of what ran through my head
when I had this idea of like power and
what you're scared of actually think I
inverted it to if I can tell you what to
be scared of or find the thing you might
be scared of or whatever then I get
power but maybe it goes the other way
too
>> I don't think we'll ever talk about
anything more important than this to be
honest with you that's Why I thought
your response was so interesting cuz you
you you made if I was going to like do
the text box above your face
>> it would have said well holy [__] that's
interesting because
>> when when you use power especially power
over because there's multiple kinds of
power. There's power with into and power
within. So people that use power within
to and power within work from a belief
system that's completely different. We
believe that power is infinite and can
grow when shared. People who use power
over work from a belief system that
power is finite like pizza and if I give
you any I have a deficit. So it's got to
be hoarded and protected and not shared.
Power over
is really important to understand
because when people are using power
over, they're definitely letting you
know what they're afraid of because
that's what they're focused on and
they're tapping into. And I think this
is absolutely true. If you give people
someone to dislike
and blame for their pain
and they look different than the people
who are voting, you [clears throat] will
win a 100 times out of 100.
If you say, "I see your pain." I can
tell you exactly the source of it and I
can fix this for you.
>> And [clears throat] the source of it is
going to be easy to see. You're not
going to see yourself in them. M
>> so that narrative that you are talking
about it is a full circle. People in
power use power to address issues that
they're afraid of. They gain power by
leveraging fear and giving people an
enemy.
That's how this works. It works like
this. I mean I spend 95% of my time in
organizations
working with seauite leaders and senior
leaders. This this is how it works in
organizations. how it works in
political, you know, how it works in
faith communities. This is how power
works in general. So power over is a
very specific kind of power. And it's
especially dangerous because in order to
maintain it,
you have to engage in periodic bouts of
cruelty towards vulnerable populations.
You have to remind people what you're
capable of.
>> So there's four types of power you you
you speak about in um
>> Damn, [clears throat] you have that in
your notes
>> in Strong Ground. Yes.
>> Well, why are you surprised?
>> I don't know.
>> There's four types of power in
leadership you speak about. There's the
power over, which is controlling or
exploiting other. There's power with
finding common ground and building
collective strength. Power two, which is
giving others agency and recognizing
their potential. And power within, which
is honoring differences and selfworth.
So as a leader of a business, if I want
to be successful, are you telling me
that I need to stay away from power over
and adopt another power within this list
of four?
>> Yeah. I think what we've seen be very
successful over time is power with,
power to, and power within. So
collaborative power, co-creation power,
self-awareness,
metacognition, knowing yourself, knowing
how you think and learn. So power with
and power too. Power over is
excruciatingly difficult to maintain.
We're not neurobiologically
hardwired
to stay in fear for very long.
So if I work for you, if I work for you
and you're using power over to lead me,
you're threatening me with my job,
you're threatening me with consequences,
you're threatening me with demotion,
one of two things is going to happen for
me neurobiologically. I am either going
to
just become numb to it. It's not it's
not going to be able, you're not going
to maintain I can't maintain that
constant level of fear. just too
demanding, [snorts] just physically
demanding. Or I might get hyper
normalized. I might just like this is
this is what I work in. This is like
crazy. This is it, you know? But every
now and then, you're going to have to do
something that demonstrates to me how
chaotic and cruel you can actually be.
Like, you're going to have to engage in
periodic acts of cruelty to remind me
that the fear is real and to put me back
in it. And so one of the things you're
seeing right now, I mean, like we in in
the US,
the deportation and immigration issues.
This is not a president that has, you
know, tightened his belt on immigration
more than other previous presidents, but
we've never seen masked people grabbing
people off the street while children
hold on to their legs screaming, "Mom,
mom, mom." We we we've never seen that
before, right? But we've had other
presidents
probably exceed
the deportation numbers that we're
seeing, but we've never seen that level
of cruelty and display. That is a real
display of cruelty as a reminder of who
who holds power and who does not.
>> It also makes me think of relationships
when you're talking about, you know, how
people are controlled with power over. A
lot of people talk about like sort of
narcissistic relationships or abusive
relationships where
they don't feel like they can leave or
you know they don't leave and they end
up becoming acclimatized to the
treatment.
>> I'm a big systems theory. I'm a systems
theory person. I think in systems theory
I was trained in systems theory. I think
if you don't understand system systems
theory, at least if you're leading an
organization right now, you're going to
fall behind because
the complexity inside and outside of
organizations is such that we need a
framework to understand how all of these
individual systems are bumping up
against each other. Like you you
probably bump up against
a hundred systems a day, right?
>> Yeah. And so what I would imagine the
story I would make up about your success
because this is true of any systems
theory is in order for systems to thrive
and grow,
they have to keep permeable boundaries.
Meaning they have to allow feedback to
flow in and out from other systems
[clears throat]
>> to be aware. So I'm just going to give
you a very good example. I'm very
excited about the female
the experts you had on
>> Mhm.
>> around menopause
women's life. I mean, I'm so excited
about that.
>> Like, just to be honest with you, like
Mary Cla is my doctor.
>> Oh, really?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Dr. Haver. So, um,
what is interesting is the systems that
just that podcast bumps up against,
you know, and the systems that would be
sending feedback that, hey, this is not
for me. I'm not clicking on this. I I
I've shared that first one with a
hundred people, [laughter]
>> you know, because there's a reality to
our lives that is uncomfortable for
people, but those are your partners and
your moms and your, you know, and your
bosses and it's real. And I can
guarantee if this was happening with
dudes,
>> yeah,
>> like it'd be a gajillion dollar whatever
over a trillion gajillion, I don't know.
Um, but just thinking about that one
podcast and the systems that you're
touching, health, women's issues, um,
family systems are affected. Like that
podcast hits 20 systems that I can think
of in my head right now.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> The divorce rates of people of women in
their 50s and 60s.
>> Mhm.
>> I mean, right. Yes or no?
>> Yeah. 100%. Yeah.
>> Right. So, a healthy system has
permeable boundaries, meaning feedback
is flowing in and out all the time. What
happens when the world gets complex is
we start not wanting the feedback. The
complexity is too big. So we start
shutting down those permeable
boundaries. Well, what happens to a
system where the boundaries are no
longer permeable. It atrophies. And in
the in the process of atrophying, the
system becomes self-referencing. Are we
good? We're great. Are we right? We're
right. Are we on target? We're on
target. because the boundaries of the
system is are no longer craving outside
feedback even when it's tough. And in
businesses today, the geopolitical
realities, the market changes, AI, I
mean, it's crazy.
>> And so our
predisposition
to shut down uncertainty and complexity
is the biggest threat to the systems in
which we work and live.
the self-protect, close the wall, put up
the drawbridge, fill the moat with
piranhas.
We just don't have that luxury. We've
got to keep the the boundaries
permeable. We've got to keep learning,
guessing, unlearning, relearning.
>> One of the added complexities is the
rise in algorithms. And and actually
when I think about algorithms that are
powered by AI, they're going to be even
better at knowing what you want to see
so that you spend time, so that you
consume more adverts, which means
probably the best thing to show me is
either something really fearful or just
to confirm what I already believe.
>> 100%.
>> An algorithm that was doing the opposite
probably wouldn't be an enjoyable
experience for the average human brain.
It would cause too much dissonance, too
much discomfort,
>> but great for democracy.
>> Great. Yeah. Fantastic. But terrible for
for running a business and selling ads.
So any company that t takes that
approach will go bankrupt. This is why
Tik Tok I think have been so successful
is the algorithm is I don't use Tik Tok.
So I have a Tik Tok account. I don't
have the app on my phone. But um from
what I hear is it's so unbelievably
addictive. People describe it to me and
they're like, "Oh my god, it's so
addictive."
>> But this [__] is the devil.
>> Yeah.
Yeah. But it's people are driven by
incentives, right? And you your your
share price is going to tumble and
you're going to be fired. And you're
going to lose your your status and your
power if you don't do that.
I'm playing devil's. Obviously, I'm not
I No, I agree. What do you think the
solution is?
And what responsibility do
the bros who run these tech platforms
have?
>> It's complicated.
>> Well, I agree. I'm not looking for an
easy answer. Go ahead. Hit me. Well, and
I just think it's complicated because
what what an objective party would say
who's just looking at the incentives of
these groups of people is if they don't
do it,
>> China will.
>> So even with AI now, you know what I I'm
like, I've sat with all these experts
and I keep hitting up against this wall,
which is, okay, if we just banned people
in the United States from pursuing this
super intelligence strategy, then Russia
and China get there first, then the
United States, unfortunately, are going
to end up being China's French bulldog.
And actually, I can't refute that. I go,
"No, you're right." Cuz we you'd have to
literally lease the technology off them.
It will be so powerful and give such an
economic advantage that you will have to
lease it off China. So I go, "Okay, I
guess Sam Alman does need to crack on or
else."
So it's complicated.
>> I mean, this is where I end up every
time.
>> I mean, look what happened with Tik Tok.
China made an algorithm. It was
unbelievably addictive. The United
States had just had to buy it off them
because they were scared that the data
was going to be used against the United
States. A prime example. Like China
like, "Fuck it. We don't care."
>> Yeah. Right.
>> Yeah. And they made an unbelievable
algorithm called Tik Tok which just
captivate, you know, the youth are all
just [__] losing their brains. So, I
don't know. I don't know. It's tough.
It's rough. Spiritual crisis.
>> Yeah. I mean, you just laid it out. You
just laid it out.
We're emotionally disregulated. We're
distrustful of each other. We don't
trust ourselves very much. And we're
disconnected. I can't give up on people,
though. I'm not built that way.
Like, I just believe that we are more
good than greedy.
You know, I I was in conversation with
Trevor Noah at an event and I mentioned
this term that I I was really excited
about and he challenged me on it and I
said, "I think what we need is cognitive
sovereignty. We need to wrestle control
away from the algorithms
and decide what we consume, what we
read, how we think, think critically.
We need to think about our attention and
our focus
as commodities that people are after
because they're after them, right?
>> He had an interesting point though. He
always has interesting points, don't you
think?
>> It's so tough to to talk to Trevor
because he's so he's always got an
interesting point.
>> He's always got an interesting point.
Damn it. Um and he's funny, but he said,
"No, we need less cognitive sovereignty,
Bnee." And I'm like, "What do you mean?"
He goes, "Everything's about the for you
page. Everything's for you. We need
communal sovereignty. He's like, you
know, the whole problem is that your for
you page is completely sovereign. You
intellectually and spiritually I'm I'm
paraphrasing what he said. I'm sure it
was like
funnier and better looking, but
um but
he he and then I was trying to think
about like I guess maybe that's not the
right term, but let me let me tell you
what scares me the most. I'm in I'm in
some weird rooms because of the nature
of my job. I'm in rooms where the people
who run these platforms and own and you
know that own the CEOs of these business
and the founders are in these rooms and
I hear them talking and I hear things
that are so misaligned
that it panics me. So I hear someone
say, "Hey, you know, tech billionaire,
what what should my kids study? I'm
worried for my kids." well they should
study coding physics you know and then
five minutes later as if that answer
didn't happen someone will say to what
do you attribute your success I mean
deeply when you think about it and the
same person will say my deep reading of
philosophy in the stoics
and so then I'm thinking to myself well
which is it dude
and then I then I start to extrapolate
from there and wonder
if there is a thinking class that's
emerging
where they're like, "We're going to read
philosophy and we're going to read
the liberal arts and we're going to
study history and the rest of you just
keep scrolling. Don't worry about the
big words. We'll we'll handle all the
big words for you." Like, it's like when
they asked Steve Jobs, "Boy, your kids
must love the iPad." Steve Jobs said,
"My kids don't have an iPad." And then
his biographer who spent time with his
family said he wasn't kidding. There's
no technology at dinner. They're talking
about art and history.
>> The hardest chapter I've ever written in
my life of any book was the chapter on
grounded confidence and strong ground.
What is the set of skill sets and
mindsets that I think we're going to
need to future ready and future proof
ourselves to be leaders moving forward?
And I think what was hard about it was
the complexity of it was probably a
combination of 30 different mindsets and
skill sets.
And when I was done, you know, for
commercial reasons, someone on my team
immediately said, "Geez, this is like a
if you can train people in these things,
this is really this is like really
important."
And the first thing I thought was, "Fuck
that. My kids
train.
I get it. It's important. like we'll
we'll we'll we'll develop some
instrumentation, measure it. We'll train
folks in it. I think it's trainable.
It's teachable. It's measurable. But
really, I want this for my kids.
I want my kids to know systems thinking.
I want my kids to know anticipatory
thinking, situational awareness,
temporal awareness. I want my kids to
have this complex set of skills.
Do I want them to have jobs one day
where all they're worried about is
shareholder value? Really, no. I want
them to own their mind, own their
intellect, own their attention, and own
their focus.
I want them to read.
I want them to understand history.
I want them to develop pattern
recognition skills because these are the
skills of the future. I want them to be
able to hold the tension of nuance and
paradox when everything in their brain
is saying pick one, pick one, reconcile,
I'm uncomfortable, pick one, reconcile,
I'm uncomfortable. That's neurobiology.
>> In those in those 20 years of your 20
plus years of your career, what have you
been exposed to from a 30,000 foot
perspective? like what what are the wide
range of reference points that you draw
upon to be the person that you are today
and you know cuz you've had it feels
like you've got a very wide range of
references clearly you know you're
someone that cares a lot about history
that comes through in your answers but
I'm wondering in your career like what
are what are the experiences that you've
had have you been working directly with
patients is it ac academic reference
points you're drawing upon
>> yeah um no one's ever asked me this,
which I've been grateful that no one's
asked me. Um, so what a pain in the ass.
But um because no one's going to like
the answer.
>> I'm excited about the answer now.
>> Everything like every single thing. Um
yes, I you know I love history. Yes, I
read academic papers all the time. Yes,
I wake up in the morning and I read
because of the nature of my work. I read
the Wall Street Journal, the New York
Times, Bloomberg, the Financial Times.
Like I yeah, I mean I I I read and a
lot. But there's a chapter in the book
that was one of my favorite to write on
the transitions home from work.
>> Mhm. and how how how tough they are and
how if you're like me, you've had a very
frustrated partner look at you more than
once in your life and say, "Hey,
I know it was stressful. I don't work
for you. Change gears."
>> Yeah.
>> Have you ever had that?
>> No comment.
>> No comment. [laughter]
Yeah. I use a metaphor in that book, in
this chapter of a lock.
And how did that come to me? because I
was reading the book series The Rivers
of London. And in that book series,
there are two gods of the Tempames. And
the Teddington Lock is where right
outside of London in Teddington is where
custody changes for them. So, I went to
the Teddington lock cuz I was
interested. I met the lock master
that runs the lock. She gave me a
three-hour lesson that day. We let
narrow boats through the temps.
I learned how lock works and that's the
metaphor that I use to talk about the
research on what do we do when we spend
all day locking in hyperfocused
compartmentalizing getting [__] done and
then instead of going home to our
partner when we get home we spend 30
minutes in the garage on Tik Tok cuz we
can't bear to go in.
So why do we do that? Because we need a
lock through period. We need time to go
into a chamber metaphorically,
change levels, let go of where we were,
lower ourselves to the rhythm of what
we're doing now. Cognitive, we would
call it cognitive and domain shifting,
and we need time. So, I looked at the
lock master at uh Teddington and said,
"This [__] is taking a long time. Can we
get this chamber filled up a little bit
quicker?" And she said, "Locking through
takes what locking through takes. If you
rush it, you risk capsizing.
We get home and then we walk in the back
door and it's like, I can't find my
shinuards. I think I left them on the
pitch. Where are my goggles, Mom? Oh my
god, you didn't sign the permission
slip. I had to sneak into the zoo, you
know? And you're like,
take me back to work where I'm the boss
of everything, [laughter] you know. So,
where do I learn those things? Well,
cognitive and domain shifting come out
of psychology.
Jimma the lock master at Teddington.
There's wisdom everywhere.
I put it together through stories and
metaphors. I mean, another thing in the
book, I mean, I'm standing on the
sideline at DKR, the University of Texas
Longhorn football stadium.
>> Um, and I'm standing with Emanuel Ao. Do
you know Emanuel?
>> No.
>> Yeah. He's great. He he played for the
Longhorns. He played for the NFL. Now
he's a writer. So, I'm standing there
and we're watching the game and I look
at him, I go, "How would you define
pocket presence?"
And pocket presence is an American
football term. So, do you know American
football? Okay. So, I'm a quarterback.
I'm going to get the ball and I have to
throw the ball or run the ball or hand
off the ball to get the ball down the
pitch down the field. Right.
>> Mhm. [clears throat] And when when the
ball is snapped and the ball is put into
motion,
there's about 12 to 1,400 lb of really
angry people trying to drive me into the
ground.
>> The people that are protecting me from
those defensive guys are called my
offensive line.
>> And the way [clears throat] they do it
is they form a pocket around the
quarterback.
And the quarterback uses that time to
decide where am I going to throw the
ball? Am I gonna run the ball? And
pocket presence is the ability of a
quarterback to use the on average 2.8 to
three seconds he has to read the field,
understand where the defenders are, and
make a decision. And so when I asked
Emanuel Ao, how would you define pocket
presence? He said,
and I want you to think about this in
terms of your business, the ability to
read the field without seeing all of it.
and trusting your team well enough to
make a move even though you can't see
everything.
>> What are the skill sets you need right
there? One, temporal awareness. You got
to know how much time you have to get
rid of that ball or get it down the
field. They they say Tom Brady, who
played for the Patriots, is any of this
ringing a bell?
>> Yeah, 92.
>> Okay. Tom Brady, they said his pocket
presence was so good, he could tell
where his offensive linemen were by the
vibrations through his his cleats on the
field.
So temporal awareness, situational
awareness, what's going on, anticipatory
awareness,
think about a great football player,
right? Think about Mossala.
>> You don't kick the ball to where the
striker is. You kick the ball to where
the striker's going to be. Mhm.
>> So, anticipatory and situational
awareness, right?
>> Pattern recognition. Have I been in this
situation before? Do I know how to, you
know, where's the goalie in the cage?
Where are they standing right now? Like,
and so
I'll take my inspiration from sports all
the time, which is why there's so many
sports metaphors,
right?
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> I think there's not a better sports a
better metaphor to describe work right
now than
Premier League football.
One of the things um per is throughout
your work is this idea of connection. I
did a mushroom
I did magic mushrooms with my girlfriend
a couple of years ago. First time I've
ever done it and um the message that
came through for me was it was about
connection and that word has had a fond
place in my heart ever since as being
really really important. And we live in
a society that's more lonely than ever
before, more disconnected in many ways
as you described when you're referencing
the spiritual crisis that we're living
in. This word connection, what does that
mean? Does it mean on an individual
basis? Does it mean me having friends
and relationships? Is that connection?
Is that the type of connection I should
be looking for? Or does it need do I
need to like do you think people need to
ladder up further to their city, their
town, their world, to the community, to
something bigger, God?
What what does connection mean in this
context?
>> Yes.
I think the answer to that question is
yes. We're neuro neurobiologically
hardwired to be in connection with other
people. And in the absence of
connection, there's always suffering.
Always suffering in the absence of
connection. So I think I mean just how
we're built mirror neurons, you know,
our ability to sync up neurobiologically
when we feel connected and are hearing
each other. So to me, connection is the
ability to be in a relationship where we
can both give and receive, where we feel
seen, heard, believed, valued.
That is that human connection is really
important on a micro level, one-on-one
with other human beings. I think a sense
of belonging and a sense of place. And I
don't know that that necessarily needs
to be a location,
but
A sense of being a part of something
bigger than you I think is also
important. So love and belonging,
connection, irreducible needs.
I I think spirituality I define
spirituality is being inextricably
connected to other people by something
bigger than us. Maybe that's love, maybe
that's God, maybe that's fishing. Like I
I you know it's different for other
people. For me, I'm faith is one of my
values and I'm a a pretty serious God
person. Um I'm a pretty deep person of
faith. I guess I would ask somebody,
what is that thing
that transcends
difference? Political difference,
ideological difference, race, gender,
you know, belief systems, class. What is
it that brings you to a common humanity
place?
Like for me, it's God. That's it's a big
challenge cuz like I I try to work from
an ethos where I try to find God in the
face of everybody that I meet. Even if I
want to punch you in the throat, I try
to like like like that's my thing in
some way. I'm connected to you
>> whether I like it or not and whether I
like you or not.
And when you talk about belonging, it's
interesting in your book Braving the
Wilderness, which I think the question
is kind of summed up by the subtitle
here. The quest for true belonging and
the courage to stand alone. This appears
to be a dichotomy or a contradiction.
>> Mhm.
>> To belong, but also to stand alone.
>> Why are both of these important? Why is
it important to belong? What does that
mean? And and why is it also important
to stand alone?
Because I don't think you can truly
belong
to anything or any or or any group if
you don't belong to yourself first.
True belonging
requires us to be who we are,
not to change who we are. That's fitting
in. Fitting in is the greatest threat to
belonging.
>> Which takes us both back to our
childhoods, right?
>> Yeah. Fit in. Fit in. Fit in. fit in.
The problem is that that chameleon
kind of skill set
means that in order to fit in, the first
person you betray is yourself. We've got
to be able to stand alone. And that's
what's happening right now in the world.
I mean, if I if I look back at Braving
the Wilderness, that was maybe the only
prophetic book that I think I've ever
written. like that like like that. I
don't think I'm prophetlike, but man,
did I call what was happening in terms
of the big sort into ideological bunkers
where we're going to get to a place
where
I don't even know you, but I'm going to
call you friend because we hate the same
people.
And you over there, I actually do love
you. you're a family member of mine,
but I'm not, you know, because we don't
believe in the same things. You have no
meaning in my life. Like, it's like we
have gotten to the place where
ideological bunkers
and those are so dangerous cuz here you
and I like let's say let's say that we
have the same belief around immigration.
Um, so we're going to flip this table
over and we're going to get behind it in
our ideological bunker and we're going
to be like, "Yeah, we're right." and
these guys are [__] crazy and [__]
y'all, you know. And then one day I'm
going to turn to you and say, you know,
one thing I'm wondering about
is how are we going to solve the problem
[clears throat]
with the folks coming over in the
dingies from France? Cuz I don't think
we're going to be able to go without
solving it because we do have an
employment issue and a housing crisis.
And then you go, you're out.
My my care for you, my connection with
you completely dependent
on you not questioning anything we
agreed to back here.
Well, that's counterfeit connection.
What's real connection? Like I got to
know what's going on in your mind cuz
your face is like we got to play poker
tech. We have to put that on our agenda.
[laughter]
What are you thinking? I was just
thinking about being a podcaster and I
sit here with all types of people. So I
had Camala Harris sat here
>> uh 3 4 days ago and I'll have someone on
the right s here you know and then I'll
have we had Michelle Obama then I'll
have Jordan Peterson then I'll have the
opposite of whatever Jordan Peterson is.
>> And I was just thinking about how um how
that's also kind of made me feel like I
don't belong because that is quite rare.
There's probably not a podcast on earth
that has had both Michelle Obama and
Jordan Peterson.
>> No.
>> Yeah. And then Kamal Harris after that.
Like I didn't manage to scare Michelle
off. I didn't scare Jordan off. And so
you get you kind of get attacked from
both sides. Oh, I mean, look, if you're
not if you're not
getting threatening [__] from the far
here, the far left or the far right, if
you're not getting both, you're not
doing your job.
>> Amen. Yeah.
>> Period.
>> But it's tough because
>> Oh, God. It is heartbreaking.
>> Yeah.
>> It will break your heart. And it will
remind you of why standing alone is on
the front of that book. M
>> because what it will do is it is winnow
the right word? It will narrow
your belonging, your true belonging.
>> Yeah.
>> Down to
a very few people.
>> I mean, I completely understand how it
happens that a podcaster like me will
end up picking a side because there is
safety in numbers.
>> Well, because there's an ideological
bunker cuz we flip the table over.
>> 100%. At any point, you know, when the
left attacks you, I'm like, the right
looks pretty good. When the right
attacks you, you go, "Oh, the left looks
pretty." Because standing in the in no
man's land is is not the place you want
to be. I know I'm never going to succeed
in this. Like, I know I'm never going to
succeed in converting pe converting
people to be nuanced and to not get
viscerally angry when I have someone on
the show who's on the right or
the show who's on the left. I'm already
aware that when the commander episode
comes out, it's just going to be a bunch
of people that didn't listen and within
the first 3 minutes the comment section
is just going to be [__]
>> Yeah.
>> And I'm like, part of me is trying to
win that war with my audience where they
too will just listen. And I know that
you don't agree with a person, but can
you just listen? Cuz that's what I do.
And it's not some act I'm putting on.
It's not like I walk out there and I
start I I'm right-wing in my kitchen or
left wing in my kitchen. Genuinely the
brain way my brain works is oh, I see
this this good in this individual. And
then I meet someone else who's on the
other side and they say, "Oh, there's a
couple of points of good." I agree agree
with them on this. That's how I am. And
it feels so weird because when you go on
the internet, you don't find yourself
being compelled by either side entirely.
>> No. No. And I think it's really
confusing. And the only limit I have
really is I am not probably going to
have a conversation with you
if your beliefs question my humanity.
Okay,
>> that that's going to be my line. That
that's going to be that's going to be
the line for me is going to be if you're
cruel
or name call.
>> Yeah.
>> Or if your core beliefs about who I am.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> Or who other people are are
dehumanizing.
I I I can't I can't that I can't do
because now I've betrayed myself in
order to make a political point about
nuance.
>> Yeah. Because that because you know
dehumanization is a really interesting
and hard thing
when you study when you look at the
research of people who study
dehumanization
and you we talked about earlier with the
with immigrant populations.
There is a circle of moral inclusion.
We are not built,
we are not hardwired to hurt each other,
to kill each other, assault, rape, beat.
It's not, we're not wired for it,
actually. So, in order to do that, you
you've got a person here inside your
moral inclusion.
In order to be okay with that, you've
got to push them outside of moral
inclusion to be morally excluded from
somebody you see as human and worthy of
moral inclusion. And the first step to
moral exclusion, moving people out of a
safety zone where you don't do horrible
things to them, the first way to move
people out is language. throughout
history, as long as people have lived.
So,
you hear people in this administration
calling a a a community of immigrants an
infestation
the same way we would talk about animals
or rats, you know. And so my only limit
to hard conversation
is if you're operating from an ideology
where women are dogs, immigrants are
illegals, you know, if you're operating
from that place of moral exclusion.
You are too dangerous for me.
But other than that, I'd probably be
willing to have a conversation with
anyone. But I can understand why people
pick sides. I tell you what, it is
lonely.
>> Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah, it's nice
to hear though. It's really nice to hear
that. That that is um
Yeah,
we've talked about it quite a lot. Me
and Jack um who's been producing the
show since the very beginning. Uh we've
we've talked a lot about how we
understand the temptation to pick a
side. And actually one of the greatest
compliments a journalist has ever given
me is they wrote in the article and this
wasn't a journalist that liked me. They
just said um we're unable to
ascertain which political party he is
part of. I thought that was a great
compliment because
>> I mean
>> it means that
>> that's that's a journal that's a
journalistic ethos.
>> I think they would want to pin me down
and say he's [__] they'd love to say
I'm rightwing or
>> something else. But they said um in a
not very nice piece they'd written about
me or whatever, they said that we're
unable to figure out what side he's part
of. And I think that's a compliment
because it's it's true. And I think it
allows me to do my job better that I
don't have too many preconceptions when
I meet people. I try and meet people for
the first time,
>> which I enjoy.
>> I think you're pretty good at that cuz
you are insatiably curious.
>> It's It's lovely and terrible.
>> Why terrible? It's terrible for an
avoidant.
I found this out recently. I've known it
my whole life, but I found it out
recently cuz I had a conversation. If
someone's I think if someone's
uncomfortable with vulnerability then
I'm like their [__] worst nightmare.
>> You are. [laughter]
>> Which is interesting cuz I don't expect
you as super vulnerable.
>> Really?
>> Uh
maybe not.
>> Carefully optimistic vulnerable.
>> Yeah, that's probably
>> like like you're co you're cognitively a
believer.
>> Yeah.
>> And trying to move the rest of you to
it.
You've got the journalistic ethos of
equal opportunity,
insatiable, curious guy, right?
>> Mhm.
What do you think the responsibility is
of someone who has a platform
>> to vet or understand the credibility
especially when it comes to science or
those kind of things of what their guest
is saying? I think that we the school of
podcasters haven't really we don't have
the um
the ex the training that journalists do.
So we're almost catching up in that
regard especially if you become a big
podcaster because you're kind of held
you're held at a in a different level.
So more recently, one of the things we
do is we we've hired I mean this
recently, it was a year and a half ago.
We hired a PhD who does exactly that.
Who after this comes out, we'll go
through everything that you said and
then put on the screen things that were
not within scientific consensus.
>> But that in itself
is a decision.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
It is a decision.
It's not a choice without consequence
either.
>> No, some people don't like it.
>> What led you to that choice?
>> When your podcast reaches lots of
people, you're forced. This kind of goes
to what I said earlier about the
political stuff. You're forced to really
get clear on what you believe and like
what matters to you. And one of the
things that matters to me is that the
stuff we put into the world, we feel
like it's helping people even if it's
not nice. And it kind of goes to
something that I read in your work,
which is like our objective isn't to be
nice, it's to be kind.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> And so, for example, my conver the
conversations we have about AI, like I'm
well aware that that's not going to
necessarily make you feel great.
>> But I think the avoidance of discomfort
in in through history,
>> oh god,
>> hasn't led to great places. So like if
you think there's a bus coming, I can,
you know, it's I can pretend there
isn't. But if I think that there might
be a bus coming and if experts and
telling me there's a bus coming, I think
we should have a conversation about the
bus coming. And actually me having that
conversation, I get messages all the
time which is like please stop talking
about this subject. It doesn't make me
feel good.
I'm very anchored to like what my my my
job is here. And I think it's we can
push people further towards uh we can
progress through
honest conversations.
So when the podcast got bigger and you
get more and more you get attacked more
for any any of your guests that you have
on,
>> you have to get clear on what matters to
you and what your job is. And so one of
the things I thought is actually when we
have these conversations, I want them to
be as accurate as they possibly can be
for the listener who might be confused
cuz it's a confusing world in this new
world of democratized media.
>> So we do that.
>> I really respect that. I just want to
say um I don't think
that that choice is the easy choice.
What is the easy choice, do you think?
>> The easy choice is
I'm going to let you
say whatever you want and I'll let my
listeners sort out if it's real or not.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> And I'll take no responsibility for the
credibility
or the facts that are being presented.
>> Mhm. Um,
what I think is interesting about what
you're doing is
it just seems like a very solid approach
where
I'm a big believer in science. You know,
I'm married to physician. I'm a social
scientist. Like, I'm I'm I'm not going
to be the golden child of this
administration when it comes to science
for sure. Like I have a I love science
>> shirt that I wear with a DNA scarf. So
like I'm I'm like I'm very real about
that.
I also don't think that everything that
we see
that is projected as peerreviewed
clinical trial. You know I think
challenges to that system are also
important. I think science cannot be a
self-referencing system anymore than any
other system can be. So to have people
that have different opinions or new
opinions
>> on but to let your listeners or your
viewers know that this is not an opinion
where there's a lot of a data collected
or that this is a controversial opinion
is respecting people's cognitive
self-determination.
I I just think it's a it's an
interesting way to do it. I just I I
think I launched the podcast and it
became very big during co
>> I'll go to Yeah.
>> And so
Houston is home to the biggest medical
center in the world like in the world
and I live in the medical center area.
In the beginning there were just you
know it just there never stopped being
funerals for physicians and people
working on CO. And so to hear on podcast
that it doesn't exist.
>> Yeah.
>> Or that you can use, you know, Windex
or, you know, like some [__] like
that. I I just started to and then I got
into a little dust up around it in my
own situation. And so I'm always
interested as we enter this world in
platform and podcast responsibility.
It is a it's a slippery slope and it's
um
>> very
>> and there's no there's no perfect
outcome like you don't want to go too
far either way, right? You don't want to
like oh the government get involved and
tell you what truth is or
>> right
>> but you also don't want to stray into um
conspiracy land and um
>> away from science because
>> you know
>> there are things that are knowable.
Yeah, there are things that are
knowable,
>> but
>> yeah,
I don't know. I I I just think it's an
interesting question for this time. And
I think it's an interesting question
when you have a platform that's
powerful. And I think if you're doing
the best you can to make decisions based
what what is the question
[clears throat]
that drives your decision- making
>> for me?
>> No, like just in general. Yeah, I got
yours. You you want to you want to help
your listeners and you want to do good.
>> Yeah.
>> Um that's a different thing than
downloads.
>> You can do both.
>> You can do both. But if your only filter
>> Well, you you'd go for [__] total
conspiracy.
>> Right. Right. Right. Right. And so I
just think it's
>> I just think it's an interesting
question. I don't have an answer. I just
know that it's an important question.
>> Yeah. And you know what? I'll be honest.
So as um I mean we're not journalists.
We're not journalists here. So we don't
really understand the rigor. I've got a
lot of respect for journalists and the
the effort they've put in to understand
the journalistic method and all those
things. I feel like we're somewhat
catching up. We didn't this podcast went
from zero to 70 million people a month
in 4 and a half years or something.
>> So, and we're just holding on. Like me
and Jack didn't run a podcast before, so
I didn't run one before. And so, we're
now catching up. And part of the part of
the way that we're shaped is with
feedback. And you get lots of feedback.
Don't have this person. I'll never speak
to this person again. Don't. And you
kind of bat that stuff off. But if
there's any ever anything that actually
feedback that actually is in contra
contradiction that does test your own
mission or your own values then you
listen and you you know you can start to
innovate. And one of the things that we
thought was smart was to have the
pop-ups on screen which everybody is
probably familiar with by now. And it's
a balancing act. We don't want to
completely discredit everything that the
guest has to say but we also just want
to give context
>> and that's kind of context what they're
saying. If something's ridiculous we'll
just remove it. Like if something's abs,
we will not publish the episode is
probably a better way of saying it. We
had a couple of episodes where people
said some guest said some things which
were just absolutely [__] crazy. You
don't need a PhD to know that you can't
exercise by lying on the ground. Like
this one guest had said to me that you
can build your muscles just by laying on
your back or whatever and and not doing
anything. We just didn't publish the
episode.
>> I can just say as a PhD that I have
attempted that
it doesn't work.
>> And it WAS FOR JACK'S [__] [laughter]
I THINK I can be your PhD on the just
laying.
>> Yeah.
>> No, I think that I respect the approach,
>> which is one of the reasons I decided to
come on
>> cuz I respect the approach.
>> We're not perfect, but we're trying
>> and it's tough.
>> That's the thing that you're walking a
path.
>> The world of business looks entirely
different today than it did 15 years
ago. Back then, building a brand meant
having huge budgets, warehouses, office
space, and lots and lots of staff. But
now you can start a business with your
laptop, an idea, and the right tools.
And I would know more so than anybody
else because that's exactly what I did.
Shopify is one of our long-standing
sponsors on this show, and they're a
brand I often refer people to when
they're starting their businesses
because it's a tool that contains many
more tools within itself. And when
you're starting out, everything is
everywhere. It's messy and it's
confusing. So having everything in the
same place is incredibly useful. Shopify
puts store design, payments, inventory,
shipping, and even AI tools all in one
place, and you can sell directly from
your website or on social media,
essentially wherever your customers
spend their time. It's truly a brilliant
business tool. So, if you want to give
it a go, head to shopify.com/bartlet
and sign up for your $1 per month trial
period. That's shopify.com/bartlet.
On that point about me and
vulnerability,
is vulnerability important? because
there's a lot of performative
vulnerability taking place in the
>> Is is it an important thing for my
health, happiness, my future to be a
vulnerable person?
>> Well, let's define it. Um, vulnerability
is the emotion we experience when we
have when we are up against uncertainty,
risk, and emotional exposure. So,
vulnerability is what I feel. It's the
cringe, the awkward, the thing that I
the emotion I feel in times of
uncertainty.
risk or emotional exposure. So, it was
really interesting because I had a hard
time helping people understand because
there's we are so raised to believe that
vulnerability is weakness that it took a
trip to Fort Bragg working with special
forces to ask soldiers a question. Give
me a single example of courage in your
life. One example that you've witnessed
or you you yourself have done. One
example of courage that did not require
uncertainty, risk or emotional exposure.
No one could answer it. Finally, a young
soldier stood up and said three tours.
There is no courage without
vulnerability. So, is vulnerability
important? It is if we want to be brave
with our lives. If we if we want to be
able to manage ourselves in a way that's
values aligned and courageous, we have
to be able to reconcile how we feel when
we're uncertain, at risk or exposed. I
mean, and really weirdly, the next week
after the trip to Fort Bragg, I was with
Seattle Seahawks, the football team, NFL
team. Yeah. Ask the players,
give me an example of courage on the
field or off that did not require
vulnerability. They said that it's not
possible. There is no courage. Like if
you're doing things in your life, in
your work, and there's no risk, no
uncertainty,
and no exposure, then they're not brave.
If you know how it's going to end,
that is not courage.
Courage is a willingness to show up and
be allin when you cannot predict the
outcome. Courage is saying I love you
first.
[snorts]
That's you. You want to know what
vulnerability is? I love you first. Have
you ever said I love you first?
>> Uh I'm not sure.
>> Yeah, it's been a while.
>> But it's hard. It's you know
>> I need to give context. It's been a
while since I've been in that situation.
>> Well, you've had to go first.
>> Yeah. Had to go first. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I mean, there's this great story
that I tell about
I I gave a talk here. It was actually in
LA. And afterwards, a kid came up to me.
He's probably 22 or 23 and he said, "Can
I tell you a story about your work and
how it's really changed my life?" And I
was like, "Sure." And a kind of a crowd
grew around. And this is like the last
time I ever got pinned, like not being
able to exit a stage because it was such
a traumatic, it wasn't traumatic, but it
was like, he said, "Well, I was dating
this woman and I was so crazy about
her." So, I took her to eat to our
favorite restaurant and I waited until
the dessert came cuz we love this
chocolate volcano. And I ordered it and
I said,
"I love you." And she looked at me and
she said, "I think you're awesome.
and I think we should date other people
and then she Ubered home.
And so I was like, "God damn, this is
the worst story I've ever heard.
[laughter]
This is not a good story." And he said,
"So I got in my car and I drove home and
the whole way home I just kept saying to
myself over and over, [__] Bnee Brown.
[__] Bernay Brown. It's like when when
does this when when's the turn on the
story, you know? And he said, "I got
home and I walked into my apartment and
I pushed the door open and both my
roommates were wired in and they were on
their computers and they looked up and
said, "Dude, what's going on?" And he
said, I told her I loved her and she
told me I was awesome. And one of my
roommates looked at me and said, "What
the [__] were you thinking?" That's not
how it works. when you are going toward
them, they go away. So, you're always
kind of going away, so they come toward
you. And he goes, "Oh, oh, no,
no. I don't want to I don't want to be
that dude."
I was daring greatly.
And he said both of his roommates just
got teary eyed and went, "Right on, man.
Right on." Like,
there is no courage without
vulnerability. How can you say you're
brave if you're not putting yourself out
there?
>> So many people have been through things
which have made it very very difficult
for them to be vulnerable.
>> I was speaking to someone yesterday who
was cheated on bunch of attachment
issues in their early childhood. And
funnily enough, when I was talking to
her about I was asking her questions
about cuz I'm very deep person. This
carries over into my personal life. I
was asking her questions about the
things, you know, she had been through,
whatever else, she just shuts down. And
she told me that she she um
[clears throat] what were the exact
words? She said that she finds
vulnerability
to be a form of intimacy that she tries
to stay away from because
she needs to really, really, really
trust the person before she opens up.
And I think this is a trend you see
across a lot of people. They they won't
open up enough to form a connection.
>> Mhm. because they've been hurt before by
opening up and it feels too scary to do
that and that results in them being
single, alone, unhappy, so on and so on.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think there's there what
you said was so loaded with so many
things. So, first of all, there's the
there there's this very interesting
relationship between vulnerability and
trust
>> and how does that work? And people
always ask me, what comes first, trust
or vulnerability? Do I trust you first,
then I'm vulnerable, or am I vulnerable
first and then I trust you? And I think
it's a very slow stacking. We get to
know each other. I share a little bit. I
don't I don't share, hey, nice to meet
you, Stephen. Here's my darkest,
horrible, most painful trauma, you know,
cuz that that is actually that kind of
litmus testing is actually a form of
armor. I'm going to throw something at
you that our relationship in no way has
been built long enough to hold. you're
going to go away and I'm going to use
that as verification that vulnerability
is dangerous. Like that's litmus
testing.
>> Let me prove to you that you're not
trustworthy.
No, no, no, no, no. Oh, I see you're
backing away. That's what I thought. I'm
backing away because we haven't built a
relationship that can bear the weight of
this story. Can we start? Can we start
small?
>> Okay.
>> Vulnerability, trust, vulnerability,
trust, vulnerability, trust. H
[clears throat]
>> I think I in that in my work we call
that like the smash and grab like I'm
gonna I'm going to hit you with
something really big and then watch you
go away and use it as evidence.
>> Yeah. And it takes a really skilled
person to say, "Yeah, I'm really
I'm taking in what you told me. I want
to be respectful and honor that. And I
don't have a way to file it right now
cuz I don't know you well enough." So, I
appreciate the share. I mean, we also
call it spotlighting. So, like if I had
a military grade spotlight that they use
in the wilderness. I work with the
military a lot. And I I picked it up and
put it in your face right here. What
would you do physically?
>> Oh,
>> that's what that's our reaction to too
much vulnerability too fast.
>> Yeah.
>> Like, yeah, I don't know. I don't know
you.
>> Um,
>> so you're talking about the slow
stacking of courage of vulnerability and
trust. And then you're also talking
about that when [clears throat]
when we've had a lot of hard things
happen to us. I think this is where I
really believe the democratization of
coaching and therapy that a lot of times
we have to work with people. Like we
have to get help to be able to open up
and take off some of the armor that we
put on because sometimes that armor that
we put on it's freaking survival.
I mean, and you want to start adding you
want to start adding variables like
race, gender,
like you know, any anything where
there's social systems also at play.
That's survival. Like telling me right
now at my career, like, hey, you should
be vulnerable with your new team and and
talk about your previous failures. You
know, well, of course I could do that.
And I would do it. Everybody would clap
and they'd think, oh man, she's so
brave. and take the new person who's a
young black woman or the new first LGBTQ
person on a team and say, "Hey, tell
tell every don't don't tell anybody
shit."
Develop trust first.
Develop uh see how how trust your own
instincts about the accountability of
this group to hold themselves
accountable for their behavior. Like
vulnerability
is not more necessary for any of us than
anybody else, but certainly more
difficult for other for for some people
for sure. And I think what's hard about
that, what's so painful, probably the
most painful part of my career is that
regardless of why the armor is on,
without vulnerability, you cannot access
the experiences that are the most
meaningful in life. Love.
To love someone is to be vulnerable from
the time you wake up to the time you go
to bed. You know that you're in a
relationship. To love is to be
vulnerable, right?
>> Mhm. [clears throat] And have you ever
buried someone you loved? No.
>> Like I lost my mom two years ago. Like
my kids, it's like having your heart
live outside of your body. Like to love
is to be vulnerable cuz it's to risk
grief and losing. Belonging is
vulnerable. The most the most vulnerable
human emotion,
joy.
Joy is so vulnerable that when some of
us get close to it, we dress rehearse
tragedy
to prepare for disappointment.
Like it's so vulnerable that we don't
even let ourselves feel joy because
we're so afraid someone's going to rip
it away and we're going to get sucker
punched by disappointment.
>> Yes or no? Like
>> people choose to live disappointed
>> rather than to feel disappoint. risk
feeling disappointed and get excited
about something. You know, it's like the
first time my kids shared with me when
they were young, certainly not the way I
was raised, but you know, I really,
really want to make this team, Mom.
And I said, I want to pause you for a
second, and tell you how brave it is to
talk openly about something you want so
much when you don't have control over
whether you get it or not. I want I want
it for you because you want it. But
regardless of what happens, I admire
your courage for wanting something and
sharing out loud that you want it
>> because if you don't get it, I'll know
that it was a crushing blow.
But that's so great because I'll be here
for you when that happens either way. So
we and I and I'm really I'm a really I'm
we call it foroding joy. That joy is so
good just waiting for the other shoe to
drop. And people who have trauma
histories are really like that. Like for
me,
because the way I was raised, when
something good happens, I'm like, "Oh
god, now what's going to happen?"
Statistically, bad shit's going to roll
around any second now.
>> And it's interesting because the group
of people that we research, the only
group of people that could take that,
you know, there's a bodily quiver,
right, of vulnerability. Have you felt
it? Yeah.
>> Yeah.
The only people that can really lean
into joy consistently are people who use
that vulnerability quiver
as a reminder to be grateful
to be able to practice gratitude in that
second. So gratitude is a huge enabler
of joy.
>> Is that automatic or can one train that?
>> No, it's a training. Oh [__] No. I had
to I I I mean
standing at my front door
watching my 16-year-old daughter walk
down the sidewalk with her boyfriend in
high school and get in his truck for for
prom, right? And I'm standing there and
I'm like, "Oh god." And you know, what
am I worried about? You know, prom
night, like car wreck, right? Of course,
when I when I tell the story, the
military is always like, "Pregnancy."
I'm like, "No, no, no, no, no. car
wreck. And so I just remember staying
there and she gets in and and I'm
staying next to Steve and Charlie, my my
son's, you know, at this time he's 10.
And I'm like, I'm so grateful. I'm so
grateful. I'm grateful for this moment.
I'm grateful that I'm a part of it. I'm
grateful that they did the CR and the
bineir over here. I'm grateful that I
got to help pick out the dress. I'm so
grateful. And Charlie goes
looks at Steve. What's wrong with mom?
Um and Steve goes, she's she's
practicing gratitude. let her do it
otherwise she's going to get on a crazy
train and it's going to be all health
and you know like because part of me
wants to say oh god oh god like it's so
beautiful and so joyful and get in your
truck and follow them right now if he's
speeding I want to know about it if he's
not stopping fully to stop sign follow
them until this date is over you know
that's that's what I want to do because
I'm afraid
because that the joy of that moment was
just too much for me
too vulnerable It appears you've
overcome
various traits of old Renee Brown.
>> No, I'm overcoming.
>> Overcoming?
>> No, I'm not over I have not overcome.
>> Have you overcome anything?
>> Yes. The belief that I will overcome
anything. I have overcome the belief
that I have overcome the belief that
I will ever arrive.
I am grateful for the skills that I have
that are new skills that keep me more
aligned with the person, the mom, the
partner, the leader that I want to be.
But I I
am mindful all the I try to stay very
mindful that I am scary when I'm scared
that I catastrophize very very easily
and that's painful for everybody around
me and I don't need to be liked. I just
need to be myself. Like, but those are
things because I will I will sit down
like two days ago and be like, "Oh my
god, it'd be so freaking easy to be
liked here." I was like, "This will be
this would be a piece of cake." And I'm
like, "Shit, I don't do that anymore."
Bummer.
>> Two days ago.
>> Yeah.
>> Ahead of what?
>> Just with a group of people that I knew
what it would take to be liked.
>> And you made the choice to just be
myself.
>> Be yourself.
>> Yeah.
>> Why?
Because now the person I'm going to
betray last is me.
Yeah. I hope I see you again, but not
that important.
>> Some people might find that somewhat
demoralizing to know that they they too
might never cure
parts of themselves that they're
desperate to change. I think people, you
know, they often come to podcasts like
this or read books like yours looking
for sol fix fixes
to not liking myself, to the way that I
react to my emotions. They want to fix
it cuz if they can fix it, then they can
be happy. I don't think that's in the
consideration set for a very
beautiful reason [clears throat]
that if we could fix it
and never have to wrestle with it again,
we would be so short on grace for other
people
that we would be
tyrants.
So, you think it it creates a form of
empathy for others?
>> Yeah. I mean, like I'm not going to I
have like really serious boundaries. I'm
a very boundary person. But when I see
someone behaving a certain way, I was
like, "My [__] sees your inner
[__] right here. I I get it. I get
what you're doing. I'm not going to
tolerate it. I'm going to set a boundary
around it, but I'm not really judging
you for it. It's just that behavior is
not okay right here.
>> But you like yourself now.
Yeah. Yeah, I do. I I
Yeah, I do.
I do. I can I can I think I can say that
pretty.
I like what I'm becoming.
And for anyone that doesn't like
themselves, what what work has had to go
into getting to the point where you like
what you be you're becoming?
I think the hardest is
maybe one of the biggest findings of my
research over the last 25 years is it's
not fear that gets in the way of us
being brave with our lives and our work.
It's armor.
Everybody's afraid. It's okay to be
afraid. What's dangerous is the armor
that we reach for to self-protect when
we're afraid. And how that armor moves
us away from love, connection,
and our values. And so I think the
hardest work is
for me constantly being aware of what is
my armor? What am I what am I grabbing
for when I'm afraid? What am I grabbing
for when I want to protect my sense of
self-worth, my ego? Like, and and how
heavy that [__] is.
You know, at some point I had to wear it
because that was survival for me growing
up. But this is the big this is the big
developmental milestone
of middle age which you are squarely
entering which is kind of when the
universe grabs you by the shoulders and
pulls you really close and says
I'm not [__] around anymore. They
gave you gifts.
Choosing not to grow into them is not
benign.
There's a consequence for that and your
armor is getting in the way. You're a
grown ass person now.
You have different choices. Let go of
what doesn't serve.
And that is the big milestone I think
that we have to wrestle with in midlife.
What no longer serves that's preventing
us from growing into who we want to be.
And is that where vulnerability comes
into the picture? Because
>> Oh, for sure. Cuz all the armor, all the
armor
is about vulnerability.
>> It requires a huge amount of um I was
going to say self-awareness.
>> Yes.
>> That some people just don't could
probably never accomplish. I mean,
>> that's why I think metaphor is helpful.
I mean most of us can understand if you
back me into an emotional corner
what are you going to get like as a
leader I know my armor perfectionism
micromanagement I get super intensive I
get recklessly decisive
I know my armor and my team knows my
armor
I think my armor in my personal life
especially when it comes to my
when I get when I feel vulnerable is
control
control. Take over all the chess pieces.
>> But that's not a good idea.
>> It's not possible.
>> It's just it's just pretend. That's
called anxiety. Like pretending that you
can control the chessboard of other
people's lives. Your own, much less
other people's lives. But I think I do
it out of
Fear
>> is fear the opposite of courage or is it
>> No, I think the opposite of courage is
armor.
>> Armor. Okay.
>> I think the opposite of courage is
self-p protection.
>> To be courageous in this context,
whether it's as a leader or in another
environment, you talk about these four
steps to courage. You talk about it in
strong ground.
>> Yeah. This was research that emerged
like 15 years ago and I was really
really nervous because I'm a grounded
theory researcher. I'm a qualitative
researcher. So a grounded theory is only
as good as its ability to work new data.
So you develop a hypothesis or a theory
based on data and then as you collect
more data does the hypothesis hold. And
you know this we collected that data
pre- pandemic
you know pre pre a lot of things. And so
I was really worried about the four
skill sets of courage which are
identifying and understanding your core
values.
I would love to do this exercise with
you sometime. Um two,
understanding what gets in the way of
you wrestling with vulnerability, kind
of owning it and moving through it
constructively. Three, how to build
trust and how to become super important
trustworthy to yourself, selfrust.
Because one of the first casualties of
failure or disappointment or setback is
we lose our our ability to trust
ourselves, our ability to make good
decisions, our ability to take care of
ourselves. And the last one, which is my
favorite [snorts] because it can really
I've seen it really change an
organization, is how to get back up
after failure and disappointment, how to
reset, how to be how to manage your own
bounce when hard [__] happens.
So those are the four skill sets of
courage. Again, evidence-based,
observable, measurable, and teachable.
We've taken
165,000 people through this work across
45 countries, collected data on all of
it. It's so exciting. And it withtood
all of the complex changes over the last
5 years, including AI, organizationally,
because this is where we do our work. I
don't I'm not a therapist or clinician.
I don't work with like families or
individuals. I mean, I have a therapist,
but I'm not one. Um, so I think
you can develop SC courage skills.
>> The third point is braving trust.
>> Yeah.
>> And I've heard about your marble jar
theory. So, I got a jar of marbles.
>> I saw that.
>> Um, could you explain to me what your
marble jar? Look at how excited you are.
>> I know.
>> Um, so this comes you know where where
is where where do I get my information?
Ellen's in fourth grade, my oldest. She
comes home from school.
>> The front [clears throat] door closes.
She slides down the door into a heap,
sobbing. Oh my god, Ellen, are you okay?
Are you hurt? What's going on? She says
that
something hard happened. She shared it
like very confidentially with one or two
of her friends during recess. When she
got back to the classroom, they had told
everybody in her class, all 30 kids,
everybody was laughing and pointing and
making fun of her. And she said, "I will
never trust anyone again." And my
response immediately to my in my mind
was, "Damn straight, not [__] person.
You trust your mama." And that's it.
Like that was my response. But again,
that's not the right thing to do, right?
You want a kid who can develop trust
with others. So I said, "Trust is really
hard." She said, "I don't understand
it." And her teacher at the time, Mrs.
Bockam, had a mar a marble jar. And when
the team when the when the class would
collectively make good decisions, she
would put marbles in this empty jar, and
when it got full, they'd have an extra
recess and party.
>> Mhm.
>> And [clears throat] so immediately what
came to me, because I'm describing
trust, which is a hard concept to a
fourth grader. I said, "Trust is the
marble jar." She's like, "What do you
mean?" And I said,
"Every time you share somebody something
with someone that's confidential and
they don't share it, they get a marble.
Every time you build trust, when you
want to share something really private
and personal, you look for a friend
whose jar is full of marbles. Do you
have any marble jar friends?" She's
like, "Not the ones I shared with
today." And I said, "Who are your marble
jar friends?" And she said, "Hannah and
Lorna." And I said, "Tell me something
they do to earn marbles." Oh, well like
if I get to my tray late at lunch and
there's no place to sit, Lorna will
scoot over and give me half her seat and
then we just share one seat and I can
sit at the table. And then the other day
when I had strep throat, Hannah was
worried about me. So remember her mom
called and said, "Hannah's worried about
Ellen. Why wasn't she at school?" But
then the biggest thing that Hannah did
was the other day and Opa, my parents,
my mom and her her husband came to my
soccer game and Hannah looked over and
goes, "Oh my god, your ma and Opa are
here." And I said,
"Why was that a big deal?" And she goes,
"Because everybody's divorced and
remarried and I've got eight, you know,
four sets of people." And she remembered
their names. And what was shocking to me
is that Ellen was conveying
that these marbles were being earned on
these very small. She knew my
grandparents' name. She gave me a seat
to sit at. She checked on me when I was
missing school. And so
it made me start thinking about the
literature on trust. So I immediately go
to the Gottman's. Have you had the
Gottmans on here?
>> Oh, twice. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I mean, just like Yeah. So I go to
the Gottman's research on trust. And I
read right off the bat where Gottman say
trust is earned in small moments every
day. He tells a story. It's my favorite
story that he tells and I've had them on
my podcast and I've done blurbs for
their books and written forwards.
They're just great. So, he tells a story
about how he's also a mystery lover like
me. He's on the second to last page of
his mystery. He's like, "Oh my god, oh
my god." Like, who did it? And he jumps
up to go brush his teeth and he gets
walks to the bathroom and he sees his
wife crying and brushing her hair. He's
like, "Shit, don't look. Everything's
good. Just go to the bathroom and get
back in your get back to your book." And
he's like, "That's a sliding door
moment.
I can I have a choice in that moment.
to build trust and stop and say what's
going on or to build betrayal and
pretend like I don't see her hurting. So
I stop I take the brush out of her hand.
I start brushing her hair and say,
"What's going on?"
That's a sliding door moment that we
have all the time, right? And so to me,
trust is built slowly over time, a
marble at a time. And that's how that's
how we teach trust
>> to the most senior leaders in Fortune
100 companies. That trust is a marble
jar. It's earned. Leaders believe, and
you're a leader, so you know, you know
the temptation.
leaders believe that in the middle of a
crisis,
you know, you put the numbers together
and there's a fever dream in the United
States and there's new tariffs and you
wake up and you know, you're you've got
a revenue line that's in crisis and then
you can just look at your people and
say, "Hello, every this is like back to
the the uh executive presence. Trust me,
here's what we're going to do." Then it
means nothing to people. What matters is
the leader that walks past you in the
morning and says, "Hey, good to see you,
Stephen. How's your mom's chemo going?
Marbles. Marbles. Then when the crisis
happens, you don't need to say, "Trust
me." You just need to say what's on your
mind. They trust you.
>> The other thing I think uh is often
plagued my mind is as a leader,
sometimes you say things and those
things can't happen for whatever reason.
Things change,
>> right? And um
and I think leaders sometimes think that
trust is always being correct, always
predicting everything correctly, always
being right.
>> No, trust is man did I think we had
nailed this.
I thought this was how this was going to
happen. We were wrong. You've
[clears throat] been working your asses
off for 6 months on this and I've got to
dep prioritize it today standing right
here in front of you. But I'm not going
to [__] you. You've been working
your ass off on a priority that
literally does not exist today.
>> I want to stop and say thank you. I saw
what you were doing. I want to be
completely transparent about why the
priority has shifted and then I'm going
to ask you for the same level of work on
the new priority.
>> Yes or no?
>> Yeah. And in the blame and
responsibility often rear their heads.
>> That's right.
>> For for better or for worse. Go like
this. The eyelash or something.
>> Oh, no. One marble. There you go.
>> Oh, yeah. [laughter] Is that a marble?
>> Yeah, it is. Yeah, cuz you didn't have
to say that, you know.
>> I think that sometimes people say you
got some [__] on your shirt. I'm like,
that's Thank you so much because it
would have been much easier for you not
to point out the bogey on my face or
whatever. You know what I mean?
>> I don't trust somebody that doesn't do
that.
>> So, I guess it [clears throat] is a
marble. Hm.
Someone said to me a couple of weeks ago
on the podcast, they said, "I trust
people who say things in public that is
against their near-term interests." And
I thought, "Oh,
that's [laughter] good."
>> Yeah, that's that's like a That's like a
That's a
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. It's a good metaphor though,
right?
>> It's the trust in [clears throat] the
marble jar has been very helpful for us.
>> And let me tell you, there are behaviors
This is plastic. There are behaviors in
relationships where you take this whole
thing and just slam it in the ground.
>> She
>> I think that's an obvious one.
There's one that's more has a more
ragged edge of grief and distress than
even cheating, which is just slowly
disengaging.
>> Emotionally disengaging.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Gosh,
>> that's a ragged That's a ragged break on
that marble jar. And it just happens
over time and every that other people
think that they're nuts and it makes
them question their own judgment.
>> Working in the sales team at a startup
can be a strange experience because one
month you're chasing leads like the
future of the business depends on it
which often it does and then the next
month you're buried in them. Pressure
builds up and eventually it starts
clouding your judgment. Then you end up
making a reactive decision instead of an
informed one. Our sponsor, Pipe Drive,
is the number one CRM tool for small to
medium businesses, made by salespeople
for salespeople. It helps you get
brutally clear on exactly where your
focus should be. It shows you what
opportunities have stalled and what is
worth your time and focus. And my team
have been using the new Pipe Drive
prospector tool, which uses AI to search
through over 400 million profiles to
find verified decision makers and shares
their contact information with you. So,
if you're interested in learning more,
head to piperive.com/ceeo
where you can get a 30-day free trial.
And that's just for my audience,
pipedive.com/ceo.
So, it's time to join the 100,000
companies that are already using
Piperive by going to piperive.com/ceo.
Now, I did something at 24 years old
that has had a profound impact on my
life. I set myself the challenge of
posting every single day on my social
media channels. And at the time I was
doing it to grow my following. But it
had this profound impact on my life. And
two remarkable things happened when I
did that. I managed to learn faster
because every single day I'm capturing
what is happening to me and trying to
distill it down into something that I
can share with the world. But more
remarkably, it led me to building a
following of many millions of people.
And that's the basis that I use to
launch the diary of a SEO. And that's
why I want to tell you about our sponsor
today, Adobe Express. They are the
platform that I use to make all the
posts across my LinkedIn and across my
Instagram. It's a couple of clicks and
you don't need to be an expert and that
is why I love using it because I'm not
an expert in graphic design. It's
accessible to use for all of us even if
we don't have the technical prowess to
design great things. So if you want to
start compounding both your reach and
your knowledge like I did at 24 years
old, then head to adobe.
Stephven and get started with Adobe
Express. That's adobe.
SLS Steven, you have been in a
relationship much longer than me, but we
share a lot of similarities in many
ways. I was wondering if um if you were
to give me any relationship advice that
might hold my [__] together
>> Mhm.
>> over the next 30 years.
I mean, you could give me so much. I
know cuz I've seen I've seen so much of
the incredible I've actually stolen so
much advice. One of the things I stole
recently, which me my girlfriend talked
about, was sometimes I'd come home and
I'm on like 10% and I heard you say
this.
>> Oh yeah. And I just I don't communicate
to my girlfriend that I'm on I've got
like 10% left and then she you know she
might want to try and work through some
[__] but she can't do it. It's going to
go bad. It's going to go bad.
>> Go bad.
>> Yeah. Let's not do this at 1:00 a.m.
>> No. [clears throat]
>> And I saw you talk about how you
communicate. You vocalize what you have
left in the tank to give context to the
other person. I guess to create some
empathy for both of you, but I've stolen
that. But is there anything else that um
you think might help me over the next 30
years to have a good rel relationship
with my girlfriend with all the risks
that you see?
>> I'll just start by saying I think
therapy
couple's work is like so incredibly
powerful and helpful. I think the
Gottman's work is really like we read
the Gotman's work together sometimes. So
I think I think that's helpful.
>> I'm surprised you were willing as
someone that struggles with
vulnerability.
>> Oh yeah. know for sure.
>> Well, you you weren't
>> No, I was willing.
>> Oh, really? Okay.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I struggle with
vulnerability, but I really respect
humility in people so much that even if
I'm not feeling humility, I will fake
humility and be like, I need help. And
then I'll say, [__] this is real. This
is hard. This they got my number. Like,
[laughter] I'm like, damn. And they just
called a thing a thing and it hurt my
feelers. Um, but I I guess the biggest
thing is that neither Steve and I nor I
had any modeling of what a healthy
relationship looked like at all.
And
I think one commitment we made is to
just
keep showing up. I think these are the
three commitments. Keep showing up.
Don't buy into the [__] that it's
supposed to be easy. It'll be the
hardest thing you ever do. and ask for
help.
And that's not there's no I wish I could
give you like a here's the secret to it,
>> but the secret to us is we keep showing
up.
>> We know it's not supposed to be easy and
we get help. And the help being you turn
to him and ask for help or external.
>> Well, well, we get external help, but we
read, we try new things.
Um,
we try new tools. We're just We don't
ever want to be done learning and trying
to be better for ourselves and for each
other.
And that's a lot. I mean, 38 years
together
is
not just like the so slow roll movie of
a life and a family, but we've buried
parents,
you know, we've gone through illnesses.
We've
raised, you know, kids. We've
we've gone through different seasons in
our own lives where we were not synced
at all. It's really really hard. But
it's I'm more proud of it than anything
I've ever done cuz my setup for success
was zero.
>> You've buried parents?
>> Yeah.
>> Christmas Day.
>> My mom died on Christmas Day after my
sisters and I were their her primary
caregiver for four years with dementia.
>> Four years.
I wouldn't wish that [__] on the people
I hate the most. I I try not to hate
people, but I
God gives me grace for it on occasion.
But um I would not wish that on anybody.
You know, there's the reality of it. You
know, she gets there, there's an
accident, you're showering your mom,
you're bathing your mom,
>> you know, and
she knows just enough
to be humiliated by it.
>> But this is life. Like this is this is
caregiving, you know, and it's a
tremendous emotional, physical, mental
weight that falls primarily on women who
are also in the workforce.
You know, thank God I had two sisters,
so there's three of us. Um but
and many people have very many people
have zero. It's like you and your PhD
resource PhD researcher. I have
resources
a lot of resources
and I think it almost killed me you know
and so
>> it almost killed you. I mean, yeah, it
it
to lose someone that you love, like I
love my mom in bits and pieces, in chips
and bones in, you know, like that is,
you know, and then there was a day when
she just got incredibly incredibly
cruel. Like my mom was the fulcrum.
Our family changed on her back. like she
was the first person to go to therapy.
She left my dad. She got us into
therapy. She worked three jobs. She she
changed everything. She talked about the
long history of addiction in our family,
you know, on both sides everywhere. She
changed our family. And so to say she
was like, you know, somebody who I
respected and revered like was is an
understatement. and you know
and we did so much healing work around
kind of how she showed up as a parent in
her marriage with my dad. And so then
the one day I went to go take care of
her and I saw that thing that I hadn't
seen since I was 14, you know, and I'm
54,
you know, and it literally like I
couldn't drive like it brought me
physically to my knees like like my
husband had to come and get me.
And I don't like
like I can I can't talk about it without
getting emotional cuz it's not like I
blamed my mom because she's in the
middle of this disease, you know, but it
was like I I didn't see her for 2 months
after that. And Steve kept saying I I
said I can't and he's like you got to
you got to heal from that. I mean, just
imagine being dropped back in a worst
case scenario situation when you were 13
or 14. And then, you know, you're just
like, I can't I can't. And, you know, my
sisters were like, I got we got we got
this. And then they'd go through a
period where they were like, I can't
right now. And then, okay, I got it. But
Steve always had it.
Steve was like, I got the diaper.
I'll take him to dinner. I'll meet with
the doctors. Like, that's partnership.
You know what I mean? That's
partnership.
>> How did How did you deal with the grief?
>> Well,
don't send me your hate mail, [__]
But, you know, when she died, it was
nothing but relief.
>> I've heard this. I've never not heard
that
>> from someone that had a parent with
struggling with dementia and passing.
>> Yeah. It was completely relief. I mean,
the day before she died, I think we had
a really important time with her, and
I'm sure she is, you know, playing
dominoes with Anne Richards and Molly
Ivans and great other female Texas
politicians,
um, Democrats. But um because my mom was
very radically political, but uh
the window of grief was just years of
there. There was, you know, very early
on there was no calling her to say, "Oh,
Charlie got a really cute date. Let me
show you the homecoming pictures." Or,
"Hey, Ellen, you know, got into her
master's program." That that all just
went away just every
week.
And so
that's why, you know, the whole the
whole strong ground book, there's a
there's a sentence in the in the first
chapter that said, I have a sticky note
on my window on my mirror in the
bathroom that says, I'd rather be the
oldest woman in the gym than the
youngest woman in assisted living
>> because
I do believe in the connection around
exercise, you know, dementia. And I I
took care of my grandmother with
dementia with my mom.
And my mom and my grandmother made a lot
of different lifestyle choices than I've
made. But the whole strong ground
metaphor is that I went to go see a
trainer. And one day he looked at me and
he said, he called me brown. He said,
"Find the ground, Brown." And I looked
down. I said, "Okay." And he goes, "Not
the floor, the ground. Take your feet,
push in to the ground. Use your mind to
connect with your body. Push into the
ground and then tell your mind, "You're
going to be using [__] lats." And I
was like, "Okay." So, I did it and I
felt them and I started whispering every
time I would do a weightlifting thing,
"Strong ground. Strong ground."
>> Strong ground. An unbelievable
unbelievable book. So, we we didn't
cover everything in this book today,
which is a great shame, but hopefully
we'll speak again in the future. But
it's the lessons of daring leadership,
the tenacity of of paradox, which is
something I was keen to talk about, and
the wisdom of the human spirit. All of
your books are amazing. You said earlier
on that someone called you a wizard when
you were younger. That's exactly what I
think you are. I think you're a wizard.
>> Why?
>> I think you're a wizard. You have an
unbelievable pattern recognition,
understanding of humans. You have so
many wide reference points that it
appears to be magic to a muggle like me.
We're out of time and the team are going
to run through the door if I'm not
careful. But but we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest. I don't know who they're leaving
it for. You actually know this person.
Um
>> did you I know the next guest.
>> No, you know the one that left the
question for you.
>> Oh, got it.
>> They didn't know it was for you.
>> Dear beautiful and highly intelligent
next guest.
What are you optimizing for right now?
>> Strength and longevity. mentally,
physically, spiritually, and
emotionally.
>> Strong ground.
The lesson, the lessons of daring
leadership, the tenacity of paradox, and
the wisdom of the human spirit. You are
you are I was trying to think if there's
any others. You are the single most
requested guest. Um, and you have been
on the show for for a long long time,
for three or four years. When we ask
people who they want me to speak to,
they say your name. and they say your
name because of these the incredible
work you've done through your own
podcast which I'm going to link on the
screen and below right now, but also
through some of these incredible books
which have changed people's lives. If
you're unfamiliar with Bnee's work, um I
think people will understand after
listening today how much they're missing
out on, I'd highly recommend you go and
listen to Bnee's podcasts. Um but also
to check out this book, Strong Ground,
which I'm going to I'm going to link
below. Um also Dare to Lead. I think all
of um all of the leadership team in my
office reference Dare to Lead so often
which an incredible book about brave
work, tough decisions and whole hearts.
You make the most beautiful artwork. I
consider these books to be artwork again
because they pull on so many different
reference points to make something that
feels so original and you've helped so
many people. The fact that my audience
have demanded I speak to you for so long
I think is testament to that. And um
you're a wonderful human being and
actually one of the things you've
inspired me to be is myself because
that's exactly what I find you to be.
So, thank you so much, Bren, for your
time today. It's deeply, deeply
appreciated, more so than I could say.
And I think you're a wonderful human
being. Please come back again soon.
>> I will. I have enjoyed every minute of
this. I would say it has not been easy
>> cuz we went to some hard places
together,
>> but [clears throat] it's been
meaningful.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you. [music]
Heat. Heat.
[music]
>> [singing]